All right. You mentioned win the hearts and minds.
Now, that was an official policy or strategy for
you, wasn't it? It was. Okay. Was it taken
seriously? And if so, how did you do it? We would,
for example, we would go into a village and we would
surround it with our infantry troops. and to
prevent the B.C. from, or the North Sea B.C. from
sneaking up and ambushing. And then we would set up
a medical dental unit inside the village, and we
would do dental work and medical work for the
villagers. And, you know, those things were
really effective. On the other hand, when the B.C.
would come back in, if someone had a gold tooth, for
example, or other evidence that they
collaborated with the Americans Then they would,
you know, there were reports of them being
executed, being tortured, harassed, taken to
relocation, you know, relocated elsewhere,
those kind of things. And, you know, once the
Vietnamese perceived that we were not going to be
able to protect them, that we had been in there a
long time, and that our strategy of counting the
numbers of bodies that we killed wasn't going to
protect them in the long run, they started to think
about their own survival more than any other
thing. Okay. Continuing with the relationship
with the Vietnamese, there was a lot of talk about
the U.S. Army beating stones, and probably an
over-exaggeration, but to what extent was the use
of narcotics, of whatever substance, especially
related to your platoon and from what you saw? I,
when I was,
my first
assignment
with Charlie Company, when I left as the acting
platoon leader, I was reassigned to the mouth of
35M. When I left the field to go to the defensive
perimeter, i expected and uh would
uh would would hear and overhear people talking
about it but they never took me into their
confidence i just wanted to get into their
confidence that uh and i could tell that some
people were acting a little weirdly and uh i never
On one occasion, we were leaving for an ambush, and
as I was checking the people off, my people off, at
that time I had about, I was taking a couple of
supplies, so I probably had about 17 people. One of
my men who was a RTO, the radio carrier, didn't have
a weapon. And I said, wait a minute, where's your
weapon? And he said, I said, if something happens,
There'll be plenty of weapons. I'll use somebody
else's weapons. And I said, whoa, hold it right
there. Middle outer police guy said, hold it right
there. Just get back and get a weapon. You're not
going anywhere without a weapon. This isn't, you
know, come dressed as you are. You know, everybody
had to have a certain amount of, you know, had to
have a weapon and so many magazines and so many
grenades and signals. You had to carry, you know,
what you thought you needed. And, uh, so at that
level, uh, I, in our unit, it wasn't, uh, I
wasn't aware of it being all that pervasive. But,
uh, it's, uh, probably, uh, and I'm thinking of, of
marijuana. Well, can I, how does that tie in with
the, um, radio operator? Well, I suspect that he
probably had been, uh, doing some marijuana
earlier. At the time, I didn't think all that much
about it. I just thought it was kind of his somewhat
absent-minded nature. But then later on, we were
ambushed, and he lost an eye. And when I got out of my
section of the hospital, I visited him, and he had
said that that he was going to
stop using someone's dope. And I assume that he'd
been using dope, and I was pretty much unaware of
it. Do you know where the marijuana was bought? Was
it everywhere? It was everywhere. Every
five-year-old kid who sold coke could either sell
you or put you in contact with someone who had you
buy anything you wanted. I really
don't know what the Vietnamese attitude towards
prostitution was prior to us being, you know,
prior to the French being,
or maybe the Japanese in 39, but It was a pretty grim
survival over there, and I think that being a
prostitute had a certain amount of acceptance in
the way of supporting a family.
So, indirectly, do you think maybe the prevalent
prostitution and the narcotics, would this maybe
have been a... and, let's say, a positive effect in
the WAM, would that have won some hearts and minds?
Or maybe just as long as the bucks were flowing,
they were smiling. Do you know what I'm getting at
there? Yeah, well, if you're getting at who was in
involvement with the American G.I. to a certain
segment of society, Yeah, that element of society
probably
has to be the general, venerable deal that needs to
be presented. Okay. Well, how about any...
There's been a lot of, well, let's say, with the
tale of brutality on the ground and the mass
long-distance and sometimes indiscriminate
death from the sky, a lot of people claim that this
was easily done and done because of the racist view
towards the gook. In fact, that was pretty common
to call the Arvins gooks, and that is a derogatory
term. Do you agree that perhaps the whole culture,
the whole people, they were looked down on?
Absolutely. When we began the war, even through
basic training and the different levels of
training that the average American GI went
through to get to Vietnam, they were referred to as
derogatory and racist terms. And, uh, your, uh,
you know, I want to get to Vietnam, we killed some
Charlie Klong. Your airborne, uh, running song,
uh, they were, they were something very, uh,
racist. And I guess there's a surveillance then in
your platoon also, right? Uh, it, it's, uh, It was a
matter of survival
at that point. And even though there was a
realization
that they're just like us, only on the other side,
and those who aren't on the other side are in the
middle, the majority of citizens, it's a matter of
survival. And I can only keep to my own right now
because if I keep to somebody else's, then it'll
kill me. Well, then would you agree that there was
an underlying racist attitude? Really, no matter
what was done to win the hearts and minds, it
probably wasn't done with, well, with the amount
of enthusiasm. I would completely agree. I would
say that from our military strategy to the
attitude that the average troop represented to
the average human being, It
was a numbered game and there was no quality. And
the attitude was a very erratic attitude. After
the My Life publicity in 1968, many people argued
or defended the incident by claiming the often
heard grenade-rigged baby tactics employed by
the VC and NBN. Is there a certain amount of truth to
that? I think there's a great deal of truth to that.
I'm not defending the incident, but I'm saying
that I know that after an extended period of
combat... A little louder please. I know that
after an extended period of contact with hostile
fire and friendly casualties occurring with
people around you being blown to bits, being sent
or killed for life, and
smiling faces turning and wheeling on you with
automatic weapons, that your ability to discern
between right and wrong and how to act really
changes. And it probably changes in most
everything. And you just become a little more
violent and flash out. You
see,
in your mind at
the time, if you can eradicate these people right
now that are affluent, you're not going to have the
problem to live. If you can't, you may not. And if
you're in a situation where your powers are
feeling that way and thinking that way, it's hard
to, it just doesn't turn off right away. And some
people are very poor judges. Well, yeah, war is
war, as some say, right? Yes. And that's not a
justification, though. Um, okay, well, I'd like
to, I guess, hit the last thing before we call this
off, and this is just pretty much your home front
experience after the war. And I'm curious, when
you, okay, you returned, could you repeat again,
when did you return? I returned on July 10th, 1970.
Okay. And, uh, that week, that was... That was
just... We had gone to Cambodia in, I believe,
March. March, April, March, yeah. April, March,
April of 1970. And... How were you received back
home? Well, by... I felt very disappointed
because when I came into Oakland, and while I was
still, before I got to the airport, I'd been
insulted by, and it's called baby killer. I'm
sorry. A what? A baby killer. by a long-haired
hippie, who,
you know, obviously had, I don't even know if he was
old enough, his girlfriend was old enough to be
concerned about the war, or the draft war. And I
just think I deserve that, and that just didn't
make me feel very good, because I felt like I'd been
lucky to escape with my life, and... That's funny
that you say that, because I've already alluded to
him in his book, Rumor of War. Philip Caputo wrote,
and he was on his way returning back home, that,
quote, we had done nothing more than endure. We had
survived, and that was our only victory. Would you
add to that, or does that pretty
much say it? Well, I think that pretty much says it.
All I could add to that would be to say that I think a
lot of us got home We regrouped our thoughts about
what we were doing there. And a great number of us,
either we do it or we get off the pot. Either we go in
there and eradicate a great number of agents, or
else we get out of there, because we are not going to
win the war the way it's going. And I think it forced
a lot of us into political situations that we
otherwise probably wouldn't have involved. and
has altered the course of our lives. Why do you
think there's still so many vets who are angry,
unbalanced, and, well, in jail, just not getting
over it? Or is there maybe an insight to that that
you could give? I think they feel like they
personally have been drained of a number of years
of their life have
been
gently experienced in Vietnam, and society has
not responded to them in general, has not welcomed
them back as people who gave everything they could
for their life, and it just hasn't been too kind to
the Vietnam veterans. He doesn't recognize the
Vietnam vetter for a number of years. If you were a
Vietnam vet, you would have drug-crazed Vietnam
vets. And I don't think the society has ever said,
you know, you people really did a hard job. You
really did. You know, you've been kicked in the
butt by the enemy, and now you've spent a number of
years spat upon by your fellow countrymen. And you
deserve that. Okay. I guess with the last
question, it ties in with my first one, and that was
of a subjective nature. I asked you earlier, prior
to NOM, what your feelings were. And,
let's see, you stated your feelings, and how did
they change once you're back in, or if they had at
all, what were your feelings right after, let's
say, a few months in the U.S.? Okay.
I went over there thinking that we were doing
the right
thing, that we were a good country, we were doing
the right thing. Once I realized that, though,
entirely, we were not doing everything that we
could, that the average GI was a little more than
space for five houses, and that the BSC people just
didn't need to be all that thrilled with us. Uh,
I was, I was disappointed on that count. I came,
came home, requested on it a while, and I
eventually became, uh, involved with Vietnam
better than I guess we would. Uh, so, so... I
basically
tried to assert the proposition that we were not
going to win the war, that the objective that we had
could not win the war, and that we should come to
some other decision and more openly refuse. I was
fairly active that way. It was a major part of my
life throughout the following college years.
Then I burned out on involvement, political
involvement, I, uh,
before I
burned out, I was a human delegate for the EFL
National Convention in Miami. And, uh, and after
working for some local candidates, uh, I haven't
done anything political, really, since, uh,
since about four years after returning home. And
my attitude has evolved from one of the terrible
mistakes and, uh, And
people who
should be
listening
have been ignoring, shoving it under the door,
trying to point someone else to one of, in the long
run, we may have served our ultimate objective.
Right now, China is in the process of
capitalizing. It looks through the example that
Japan has set since World War II, the example that
economic might is inferior to military might.
They
look to Russia
and probably don't want
the average Chinese citizen to live the life that
the average Russian citizen lives, and think that
they can accomplish everything they want to by
economic means. I think that Vietnam would,
Russia and China, It
had
the effect of their
parting ideological
ways, and the Chinese deciding to go elect
military troops. And I think that our presence in
Vietnam for the number of years, the protracted
time that we were there, probably helped in the
Chinese leadership at that time, that the
Americans wouldn't have been where they were for
quite a period of time. They would create enough
problems that they weren't about to, that they
would draw lines and not allow the Chinese to run
whole hog over that section of the world. And
enough people in China probably decided that they
really didn't have to fight for that. And
I'm not sure that without Vietnam, without
Vietnam, there may have been more Chinese
involvement in the government in Cambodia,
Vietnam, Thailand, Laos. And
with Vietnam, I think it helps change the course of
superpowers because China is involved in
capitalizing. Russia has a very limited, I think
Russia has a limited amount of time, number of
years. They're going to have to gather so many
South Americans and Africans and third world
nations to
their
form of government before China capitalized,
because China is going to be the first example to
third world peace. And I think that because of our
being involved in Vietnam, China decided, China
was prevented from taking any more direct action
by its more radical, early 1960s government. And
as
a result,
it's evolved into a somewhat more peaceful
nation. Okay. Well, I would maybe like to
sometimes catch a follow-up interview on this,
even though it's not dependent on a grade, because
we've touched upon a lot of things, and with some
detail and then without some detail. So for this
one, thank you very